# epa-public-water-arsenic
<b>Public water arsenic concentrations in counties and community water systems  across the United States, 2006-2011</b>

<b>Introduction:</b>
<u>Background:</u> The US Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Final Arsenic Rule (2006) lowered the arsenic maximum contaminant level (MCL) from 50 to 10 µg/L for public water systems. We used the EPA’s 2006-2011 Six Year Review of Contaminant Occurrence Database to compare community water system (CWS) arsenic concentrations during (2006-2008) versus after (2009-2011) initial monitoring for compliance with the MCL. Our objective was to characterize differences in CWS drinking water arsenic exposure across sociodemographic subgroups in the US. 
<u>Methods:</> We estimated three-year average arsenic concentrations for 36,406 CWSs (98%) and 2,740 counties (87%) across the US and compared means, mean differences, and percentiles in water arsenic concentrations (via quantile regression) for the entire US, and by region and sociodemographic categories. We categorized CWSs and counties relative to the 10 µg/L MCL (High if above the MCL; Low if below) for each three-year period. 
<u>Results:</u> Nationwide CWS arsenic concentration means (µg/L) were 1.89 in 2006-2008 and 1.71 in 2009-2011 (mean difference -0.19, 95% CI -0.27, -0.12). Mean differences were -0.41 (-0.65, -0.17) for the Southwestern US and -0.75 (-1.35, -0.15) for New England. The nationwide change (95% CI) in CWS arsenic concentrations (µg/L) was -0.28 (-0.42, -0.14), -0.46 (-0.66, -0.26), and -0.92 (-1.18, -0.66) at the 85th, 90th and 95th percentiles, respectively. CWSs in the Southwestern US were most likely in the High/High category (not successful in reducing water arsenic below the new MCL). CWSs served by groundwater, with smaller population size, and serving largely Hispanic communities were more likely to be non-compliant in both periods.
<u>Discussion:</u> CWS arsenic concentrations declined in the US from 2006 to 2011 with significant variability by region, water source, and population size. Communities which were largely Hispanic, in the Southwest, and served by small CWSs reliant on groundwater were more likely to remain exposed to arsenic concentrations in public drinking water exceeding the arsenic MCL, raising environmental justice concerns. Nationwide estimates of CWS drinking water arsenic concentrations at the county- and CWS-level are made available for further use in epidemiologic and exposure assessment studies. 


This code recreates the analysis published in <i>JournalName</i> in (citation).
